Abstract:

Adaptive systems are expected to cater for various operational contexts through having multiple strategies in achieving their objectives and the logic for matching strategies to an actual context. The ability to choose the right strategy for a context increases the dependability of a system, its availability and fitness to purpose. The full prediction of all relevant contexts and their combinations at the design stage is a complex task and may require advanced techniques such as simulation and an iterative refinement through mining of data describing the system past operation. The objective of this paper is to provide an automated reasoning to refine the specification of contextual variables and their relation to strategies. This refinement shall detect dependencies between such variables, priorities in
monitoring them and decide on their relevance in choosing the right strategy in a decision tree. Such refinement shall help in increasing fitness between strategies and context and also help the optimization of the context monitoring process. This paper provides an approach for the automated detection and analysis of context conditions and their combinations in relation to systems strategies using the system operation behaviour, generated via simulation or actual operation history. Our approach employs a data mining process to cope with the large volume of data and the large space of potential correlations and combination of variables. Our approach is requirements-driven and we use goal modelling to represent the system various strategies to achieve its goals and its extension, the contextual goal model (CGM), for the mapping of contexts to the system’s behaviour. We experimentally evaluated our proposal on a Body Sensor Network system (BSN), by simulating a myriad of resources that could lead to a variability space of 4096 possible context conditions. Our results show that our approach is able to elicit subtle contexts that would significantly affect the service provided to BSN assisted patients and relations between contexts which can also help the decision on their need and priority in monitoring. Additionally, we explored the scalability of the mining process in the BSN context, showing it is able to perform under a minute even for simulated data at the size of over five orders of magnitude. Lack of precise definition of contexts and their relation to system strategies is a lifelong problem due to the dynamics of the system environment which may introduce new contextual variables and relations and make others irrelevant. This makes data mining, despite its potential to lead to approximate and partial results, more practical and supportive to classic requirements specification methods typically requiring intense human intervention.

  This repository is a vehicle to share the images, datasets, results and other complementary outputs that support the understanding of the method and the replication of the experiments. We structured the repository as follows:

    1 - BSN: Files relevant to the description and representation of the BSN structure and operation, as well as 
    the implementation of a BSN simulation in Python;

    2 - Evaluation Graphs: Outputs from the data mining method, containing results concerning the scalability and 
    the contribution itself;

    3 - Generated Datasets: Datasets generated by the simulated prototype, object of the Data Mining process.
